# Creating a Simple API - Part 1



### Overview

You can't partake in API testing if you don't have an API, right? Of course not, and that's why this section will serve as a walkthrough on how to create a simple REST API using NodeJS, which will be used later when testing with with Postman. Follow the steps below to flesh out your API.



### Before We Start

1. Make sure you have your favorite editor ready (i.e. VSCode, Atom,...Notepad++, etc.).

2. If not already installed, install node onto your system. You can download from here: https://nodejs.org/en/.

3. We'll be using Express to make our API, so feel free to read up on it before starting: https://expressjs.com/.



### Step 1: Creating a Project

Assuming that you have already installed Node, it's time to begin creating our API. We'll start things off by initializing an empty project that will house our logic. Let's get started by opening a terminal and making a working directory using the commands below.

```cmd
$ mkdir simple-api
$ cd simple-api #to move into folder
```

Once that has been created, the next step will be to create the heart of every Node project a <code>package.json</code>. The command below will create the json file within the root of your directory. You'll see a series of prompts, which you can keep as default with the exception of **entry point**. It's usually recommended to change the **entry point** to be <code>app.js</code>, but you can name it whatever you'd like or even keep the default name.

```cmd
$ npm init 
```

You should now see the <code>package.json</code> in your directory. Now it's time to move to the next step  where we'll install all the necessary dependencies.



### Step 2: Dependencies

Luckily, since this is a simple application, we won't need to install that many dependencies. In fact, we'll only be installing two for now. Since we'll be using Express, we'll need to install the <code>express</code> package. We'll also be installing <code>chai</code>, a testing framework. In your terminal, run the following commands.

```cmd
$ npm i express chai #will install both packages in one go
```



### Step 3: Server Setup

Now that we have the dependencies taken care of, it's time to set up the server using Express. We're going to start off by creating an <code>app.js</code> file, and this will be where we put the code to start and run our server locally. Take your time and write the out the code snippet below.

```javascript
const express = require('express');

const port = 3000;
const app = express();

app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`Server running on localhost ${port}`);
});

```

Just a brief description about what's happening above. Line 1, we're importing the <code>express</code> package into file, where it is instantiated in the next line to be used throughout the file. If we look at the <code>app.listen()</code> method starting on line 6, what the method does is spin up a server to be hosted locally. If you were to run the below command in your terminal you see that *Server running on localhost 3000* printed in the console. If you were to open a browser on your computer and direct to https://localhost:3000 you should see...well you should see nothing. but a blank page. This is normal, and in the next step we'll be setting up the <a href="https://expressjs.com/en/starter/basic-routing.html">**routing**</a> so that you can see data on the page.



### Step 4: Routing

Routing refers to the way an application responds to requests made by a client. This is done using the API request methods that we briefly introduced in the **Overview** section. What we'll be doing in this step is setup the routing of our application, so that we can later serve and handle data on request from the client. Let's start things off by first creating an new file to house the logic. For this example we'll name in <code>crayons.js</code>, eventually we'll be dealing with data related to crayons, but for now we'll only focus on creating the routes. Once the file is created, take your time and type out the below code snippet.

```js
const express = require('express');

const router = express.Router();

router
  .route('/')
  .get((req, res) => {
    res.send('This is a GET request');
  })
  .post((req, res) => {
    res.send('This is a POST request');
  });

router
  .route('/:id')
  .get((req, res) => {
    res.send('This is a GET by id request');
  })
  .put((req, res) => {
    res.send('This is a UPDATE by id request');
  })
  .delete((req, res) => {
    res.send('This is a DELETE request');
  });

module.exports = router;

```

Notice on the second line we are instantiating the <code>Router</code> method from the <code>express</code> package. This will allow us to use the built-in request methods. These methods take two parameters, the *path* (i.e. '/' and '/:id') which represents the endpoint that the client will call when sending a request, and a <code>function</code> that will handle the data based on the request (<code>req</code>) and ultimately send a response (<code>res</code>) to the client. Now lets go back to our <code>app.js</code> so that we can import the routes using the amended code changes below.

```javascript
const express = require('express');
const crayons = require('./crayons');

const port = 3000;
const app = express();

app.use('/crayons', crayons);

app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`Server running on localhost ${port}`);
});
```

We've imported our routes on line 2, so now we can make use of the <code>use</code> method which takes a base path for our server and the crayon routes as parameters. If you were to now navigate to the base URL https://localhost:3000/crayons, you should now see *'This is a GET request'* on the page since we have now hit the GET request endpoint.



### End of Section

This concludes part one of creating a simple API. We've done the work to set things up, but now it's time to flesh out the routing and introduce the data that we'll be working with and this will be covered in the next section.



